Data transformations are useful tricks for making certain types of
data easier to model. In this video, we will first define
what we mean by transformations and then review when it might be useful or
necessary to transform data. A transformation is a rescaling
of the data using a function. When data are very strongly skewed,
we sometimes transform them, so that they are easier to model. The most commonly used transformation
is the natural log transformation, which is often applied when much of the
data cluster near zero relative to larger values in the dataset and
all observations are positive. For example, we saw earlier that
the distributions of income per person was heavily right skewed. But after applying a natural
log transformation, the data become much more symmetric. Sometimes this type of data
are much easier to model, because they are much less skewed and
outliers are usually less extreme. Transformations can also be applied to one
or both variables in a scatter plot to make the relationship between
the variables more linear. And hence,
easier to model with simple methods. For example, here we have a scatter plot of income
per person versus life expectation. The relationship is positive and curved. If we apply a log transformation
to the response variable and then plot the relationship again,
the relationship stays positive, but becomes more linear, which makes it easier
to model than the untransformed data. Transformations other than
the logarithm can be useful too. Let's take a look at a new dataset. Here, we have a scatter plot of a random
sample of cars weight versus their city mileage. We can see that the two variables
are inversely related, which is expected. Cars that are bigger get fewer
gallons to the mile, but the relationship is not linear. In addition to the log, we can also
try a square root transformation where we plot the square root of the weight
versus miles per gallon or the inverse transformation where we
divide one by the weight of the car. It's difficult to tell just looking at
these plots which transformation works better or if either of the transformation actually yield something
better than the original data. Later in the course, we'll get into a little more detail
about how to make such a call. But for now, it's important to just
realize that transformations can be useful even though they complicate
the interpretations a bit. After all, log of income or the square
root of weight are not easy to evaluate. While we can come up with some guidelines
for which transformation is useful. Instead of focusing on a list of rules,
it's important to understand why we might even want to
apply transformation in the first place. So let's review once again the common
goals in transforming data. We might want to see the data
structure a little differently. We might want to reduce skew
to assist in modeling or we might want to straighten a nonlinear
relationship in a scatterplot, so that we can model the relationship
with simpler methods.